How Bobby Bones and partner Sharna Burgess pulled off the 'DWTS' Mirrorball Miracle
Bryan Alexander  USA TODAY
Published 3:55 AM EST Nov 20, 2018

Bobby Bones hoists the mirrorball trophy on "Dancing With the Stars."
Eric McCandless, ABC
LOS ANGELES ¡ª During the excruciatingly drawn-out, dramatic pause before crowning the new "Dancing With the Stars" champion Monday night, Bobby Bones insists he wasn't suffering.

The irreverent country-radio host with the infectious smile, and shaky dance skills, was sure he was going to lose to a field of much more polished ballroom performers.

"It actually wasn't bad for me. It wasn't like I was going, 'Oh my Gosh, oh my Gosh.' " Bones tells USA TODAY. "Because I just didn't think I was going to win."

Moments later, 'DWTS' host Tom Bergeron announced that Bones and pro partner Sharna Burgess had won the competition, besting fellow competitors model Alexis Ren (with pro Alan Bersten), "Harry Potter" star Evanna Lynch (with pro Keo Motsepe) and Disney Channel star Milo Manheim (with pro Witney Carson).

The shocking win has been called the "Mirrorball Miracle."

More: 'Dancing With the Stars' finals: Bobby Bones crowned the winner of Season 27


Sharna Burgess and Bobby Bones right after winning "Dancing With the Stars."
Eric McCandless, ABC
Standing ankle-deep in ceiling glitter, wearing a shocked smile and a lipstick mark on his right cheek (from Burgess), Bones afterwards could only thank the fans who propelled him to victory by overcoming his lower judges' scores.

"I¡¯m so thankful to my people. They won it," says Bones. "And Sharna."

Bones made it clear to give total props to his pro partner Burgess who made the best of his strengths, and covered up the clear dancing flaws, to ride towards improbable victory. In the seconds after their names were announced, Bones pulled Burgess in on the dance floor and spoke to her urgently as the glitter fell and fireworks popped. It was Burgess' first mirrorball trophy, after three times ending as runner-up.

"The only thing I said to her for those first 10 seconds was 'I am just so happy to you. So happy.'  That¡¯s all I wanted her to know. And I meant it too," says Bones. "I¡¯m way down the line for people that deserve a mirrorball.  It¡¯s the people that put us here, and Sharna."

But, to be fair, Bones is a force of nature who did have what even he calls the "best dancing night I have ever had in my entire life."


The greatest showman performs his final "DWTS" number.
Eric McCandless, ABC
During the couple's final freestyle dance, to Panic! at the Disco¡¯s "The Greatest Show," the top hat wearing Bones hit all his high points. He smiled as he called himself "clueless" in the intro before hoofing admirably ¡ª then he silenced the audience applause to add a cheeky "floss" dance at the end.

 Even crusty judge Len Goodman was moved, saying that "the people's champion" had "tonight, become my champion." For the first time Bones and Burgess scored perfect 10s from the three judges. The duo fell to the floor in shock.

"We have never even received a nine before, and we got 10s," says Bones.

"I thought that was going to be the peak of our night and of our season," says Burgess. "Then they went and gave us a mirror ball trophy."

In a season where the popular vote has caused upsets, shocking sendoffs of finalist-caliber dancers and scorn from dance purists, Bones pulled out the final victory. But it's impossible to hold it against him. Even Disney's Manheim, who danced two masterful numbers for perfect scores in defeat, could only shake his head in admiration.

"I'm so happy for Bobby, this is a show that's about who the person is," says Manheim. "And Bobby's the champ." 

Bones didn't have much for answers as to the next steps, or even where he's going to place his mirrorball trophy.

"I have no idea what I¡¯m going to do with it. Right now, I just want to lay it down because it¡¯s so heavy," he says. "I'm just know I'm going to remember this really crazy journey that I was led through."


Sharna Burgess and Bobby Bones come off the dance floor victorious.
Eric McCandless, ABC
 

 

Published 3:55 AM EST Nov 20, 2018