Jeff Horn eyeing multiple weight divisions, big fights at home after 96-second win over Anthony Mundine
Updated earlier today at 3:07am

Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume.
VIDEO: Jeff Horn stops Anthony Mundine in the first round, knocking him out in 96 seconds. (ABC News)
RELATED STORY: It took just one round: Horn knocks Mundine to the canvas in BrisbaneRELATED STORY: Jeff Horn KOs Anthony Mundine in just 96 seconds, as it happened
Jeff Horn is now the undisputed main attraction of Australian boxing after comprehensively ending the era of Anthony Mundine.

Key points:
Jeff Horn emphatically knocked Anthony Mundine out inside the first round of the highly anticipated fight
Mundine declares his "time's up" as a boxer following his ninth career loss
Win for Horn comes as he tries to rebuild after 2018 loss to Terence Crawford
The former WBO welterweight champion bounced back from his defeat to American Terence Crawford in June with a devastating first round knockout of Mundine at Lang Park on Friday night.

The 96-second victory puts Horn's career back on track towards future world title bouts.

Post-fight, Mundine anointed Horn as the man to lead the sport in Australia going forward.

"There's some pressure with that because Mundine had that wrapped around his finger and he's done like an amazing job picking up boxing in Australia," Horn said afterwards.

"He's an unheard of type of athlete ... it's a little bit daunting in a way knowing that that's on my shoulders now."

Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume.
VIDEO: What's Jeff Horn's next move? (ABC News)
Horn's trainer Glenn Rushton and promoter Dean Lonergan are already thinking big for the 30-year-old.

Rushton said Horn's display at the 71-kilogram catchweight against Mundine opened up several possible future paths for his charge.

"We'll be looking at all opportunities in three weight divisions really," Rushton said.

"I see that Jeff can fight at welterweight, I know he can make welter, he fought all his amateur career at 64 [kgs].

"He showed tonight he can easily adapt to either super-welter or light-middle as it's known or even middleweight.

"You've got to go where the big fights are, we want the big fights, there's no point fighting the easy fights."

 Terence Crawford punches Jeff Horn in their world welterweight boxing title bout in June 2018.
PHOTO: Jeff Horn has made clear he wants another shot at Terence Crawford, the man who took his world title in June. (AP: John Locher)
Horn's camp has already flagged an intention to try and lure Crawford to Australia for a rematch after the American inflicted Horn's only professional defeat in Las Vegas in June.

Potential bouts against Mexican WBA super-middleweight champion Canelo Alvarez or American two-time welterweight world champion Shawn Porter are also options interesting Rushton and Lonergan.

Above all, Rushton wants to use Horn's Australian drawcard status to bring big fights here and not force his man to head overseas.

"Stuff Vegas. Stuff America. Let's bring the big fights here," Rushton said.

"I want to see Jeff Horn bring these big fights to Australia."