New rumors: Galaxy S10 colors, 5G variant launch, and cheaper model details
NEWSBY C. SCOTT BROWN15 HOURS AGO 108


A new batch of rumors about the upcoming Samsung Galaxy S10 just popped up online.
The rumors suggest a new set of color options for the devices, as well as some details about the expected cheaper variant.
The 5G model of the Samsung Galaxy S10 will likely launch later after the initial launch.
The launch of the Samsung Galaxy S10 is only a few months off now, and today a new batch of rumors pertaining to the upcoming smartphone series popped up online.



每每 ADVERTISEMENT 每每


EDITOR'S PICK
Samsung may launch cheaper Galaxy S10 model, specs and price leaked
The rumors stem from SamMobile, which is a reliable source of smartphone news. However, as the launch of the Galaxy S10 is still far off and the sources of the rumors aren＊t divulged, you should absolutely take all this information with a grain of salt.

With that being said, let＊s break down the rumors:

Colors 〞 According to SamMobile, the Samsung Galaxy S10 will have four color variants: Black, White, Yellow, and Green. Black and white are obviously popular smartphone colors, but yellow and green are pretty uncommon. Since this is Samsung we＊re talking about, it＊s probably safe to assume that all colors won＊t be available in all areas and that some of the color options might not arrive on launch day.
5G Support 〞 We expect there to be a 5G variant of the Samsung Galaxy S10. However, the new batch of rumors suggests we won＊t see the 5G-supported model in February next year. Instead, the 5G Galaxy S10 will launch around or even along with the Samsung Galaxy F 〞 the long-awaited foldable phone from the company. That launch date is not yet known, but we expect it to land a month or more after the launch of the Galaxy S10.
In-Display Fingerprint Sensor 〞 At this point, we fully expect one of the flagship features of the Galaxy S10 to be the ultrasonic fingerprint sensor, which will live underneath the display. However, SamMobile suggests only two of the S10 models will feature the new technology: the Samsung Galaxy S10 and the Samsung Galaxy S10 Plus. The cheaper model of the S10 〞 codenamed ※Beyond 0§ 〞 will likely not feature the in-display fingerprint sensor.
SamMobile also suggests the entry-level S10 will start at 64GB of internal storage. While this isn＊t too surprising, it could mean that the two higher-level S10 variants will start with more storage, possibly 128GB. However, that＊s just speculation at this point.

Click below to read about everything we currently know about the Samsung Galaxy S10.