When the political going gets tough, blame sexism
Cathy McGowan, Julia Banks, Kerryn Phelps and Rebekha Sharkie talk before voting on a suspension of standing orders during Question Time. Picture: Kym Smith
Cathy McGowan, Julia Banks, Kerryn Phelps and Rebekha Sharkie talk before voting on a suspension of standing orders during Question Time. Picture: Kym Smith
JANET ALBRECHTSEN
COLUMNIST
@jkalbrechtsen

11:00PM NOVEMBER 30, 2018
652 COMMENTS
Asked whether she could imagine a world of equal footing for women, Julie Bishop told an audience of accountants on Tuesday: “Has anyone seen the latest series of House of Cards, episode five? Say no more.”

In fact, there is more to say and Bishop’s quip about the fictional Claire Underwood is as good a starting point as any for a frank foray into women and politics.

First, spare us a feckless female politician from a television drama who fakes an emotional breakdown as part of her latest wicked plan for self-aggrandisement. We have enough real-life women who play the victim in Canberra, even if they don’t plumb the depths of Claire’s malice. Last season, Bishop’s chosen female character poisoned her lover, then shagged him as he lay dying. Say no more about that then.

READ NEXT

COMMENT
Workers’ utopia will be hellish
KATRINA GRACE KELLY
There is plenty to say about political treachery in federal parliament this week when Julia Banks resigned from the Liberal Party to sit as an independent. It was disastrous for the Morrison government. And it was no raised fist for women either. Banks’s lament about those “dark days in August” raises a perception of her as so ­reliant for her political relevance on one leader, Malcolm Turnbull, that she couldn’t stay around under Scott Morrison. She looks like the patsy for the man who is intent on bringing down the government. And riding his coat-tails is not female empowerment.

Banks joins a growing list of women who complain about sexism when things don’t go their way. Think former prime minister Julia Gillard, former Victorian police commissioner Christine Nixon, former boss of the Australian Human Rights Commission Gil­lian Triggs, former Liberal deputy leader Bishop. Sour grapes? Serious sexism? Who can tell? Banks didn’t name anyone. When women blur the line, using claims of sexism for base political pur­poses, they make poor role models for younger women. And they dishonour genuine victims of sexism.

Sadly, the member for Chisholm is set to become a symbol of a woman who prefers power over responsibility. Banks crafted a bombshell on Tuesday that transformed her from an anonymous backbencher into a woman searching for crossbench limelight. Every government proposal will see the media seek her out to check numbers in the lower chamber.

Banks’s swipe at the actions of a “regressive far Right” of the Liberal Party that doesn’t listen to people ­rebounded on to her the next morning when a woman from Cairns rang her electoral office. This 54-year-old woman, who helps run a 30-year-old family business and has voted Liberal since 1996, is not political. She’s not a member of the Liberal Party. And she doesn’t want attention. But she did want answers from Banks about the ­future of the government. She contacted The Australian soon after the phone call.

“I was very polite, gave my name and said that I was from Cairns, and that I was speaking as a Liberal voter to express my disappointment at her defection, that I felt she had a wider responsibility to all Australians. The woman on the phone screamed at me, ‘We have no responsibility for you’, and slammed down the phone,” she told The Australian. Perplexed, the woman rang back. She said Banks’s electorate office staff member again gave her short shrift, and the phone went dead. “Is that what people in the city think about us in far north Queensland?” she said to The Australian a few hours later.

Banks has the same listening deficiency she condemns in others. Still, some women in the media were quick to share a photo of Liberal men walking out as Banks delivered her Tuesday broadside. Finding offence from the trivial is a modern fad, to be sure, but why would any self-respecting Liberal watch Banks cut and run when times are tough for the Liberal Party and the Morrison government? Her retreat in crisis was not a fine moment for women.

Banks’s claim that she left because the party has changed is hard to understand, too. She was in parliament as a Liberal for a grand total of two years. The Liberal Party has held government for 52 of the 74 years since its foundation and endured many raucous internal disputes over policy and personalities. Long-running dramas between the so-called wets and the dries in the 1980s pitted Liberal against Liberal. That was in opposition. In government, John Howard managed many civil debates within his broad church because he understood the party’s electoral appeal depended on two philosophical strands: classical liberals and conservatives.

The schism within the Liberal Party is deeper and different today. In the ’80s, disputes broke out over economic issues, industrial relations and privatisation. Today’s disagreements cover everything from fiscal responsibility to social issues and basic freedoms that once were bread-and-butter values for Liberals. But the bigger problems are unresolved leadership clashes and leaders who are defective at managing policy ructions.

Consider Howard’s handling of the debate over Australia remaining a constitutional monarchy or becoming a republic. That fundamental question about our national identity attracted visceral responses from both sides. Three members of Howard’s five-member leadership team wanted a republic: Peter Costello, Richard Alston and Robert Hill. Howard managed tensions by granting a free vote for the party, and the rest is history.

If Banks deserted the Liberal Party on Tuesday over policies, she didn’t name them either. A vague mention of her “sensible centrist values” is no substitute for substance. Banks is part of a growing cohort of Liberals whose values are largely unknown to voters. Some rarely make a dent on public debate or swing a vote their party’s way. Some can’t bear the idea of raising cash for the party. Most ­become known for regularly dumping on their own party ­behind closed doors. ­On that last score, what was Kelly O’Dwyer thinking with her homegrown “deplorables” moment the day ­before? In reported comments during a crisis meeting of federal Victorian MPs that she has not denied, the Victorian cabinet minister ­accused Liberals of being seen as “homophobic, anti-women, climate-change deniers”. In other words, she thinks voters who tick the box for the Liberal Party are equally homophobic, anti-women, climate-change deniers? Emulating Hillary Clinton is foolish enough; doing so to attack your own party is utterly bonkers.

The better explanation for Banks’s departure is that she was not suited to the Liberal Party or a parliamentary team. Fair enough. It’s how Banks brought the party to its knees. When you win a seat as a Liberal, drawing on party support and money, not to mention loyal party volunteers, and Australian voters, don’t expect to be ­rewarded for your disloyalty.

Howard was right to scold Banks for forgetting that she owed the Liberal Party. “She, like me, owes a lot to the Liberal Party,” the former prime minister told Leigh Sales on the ABC’s 7.30 on Tuesday night. As it turns out, the rookie Liberal MP who hankers for the crossbench spotlight has more in common with that other Liberal deserter, Cory Bernardi.

The Liberal Party’s biggest problem with women is a trio of Liberal women (one former) who appear to want to tear down the Morrison government. It has been dismal to watch the former foreign minister throw her hat in with the grievance politics of pussy feminists such as O’Dwyer and Banks. Bishop became an echo chamber for their simplistic demand for equal representation of women in parliament. As Bishop knows only too well, politics doesn’t suit everyone, and very likely suits fewer women than men. Many women regard motherhood and rearing children as a messy, demanding, beautiful and exhilarating privilege. Many women cherish a family life caring for children. It’s not that women can’t go into politics. Banks did, as did Bishop and O’Dwyer and a host of others, following in the footsteps of women such as Edith Cowan, Enid Lyons and Irene Longman.

It’s more a case that women may not want to go to Canberra in the same numbers as men. That’s not a judgment or a criticism of women who enter politics or women who don’t have children. It is a reality. When women such as Banks and Bishop complain about unequal representation, they could mention that difference. It honours women who make different choices. And feminism is about choices, right?

On Wednesday, Bishop don­ated a pair of red pair shoes to the Museum of Australian Democracy. From Claire in House of Cards to Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz then. Bishop said: “If by gifting these red shoes … I inspire just one young woman to aspire to enter public life, to aspire to be a foreign minister and indeed prime minister, then this gift will have been worth making.”

Two months ago, Bishop called for “more substance, less theatre” from our politicians. Agreed. ­Female empowerment doesn’t come from silly gifts of red heels or sassy emojis. Or self-aggrandisement. Or a WhatsApp group for a small chorus line of female politicians drawn together by griev­ances. Female leaders such as Helen Clark in New Zealand and Britain’s Margaret Thatcher rose to the top by articulating ideas, being team players and being a leader for their political cause. That is the best kind of clenched fist, at least for those women who don’t want or need to use their gender to get ahead.